I recorded the documentary film "Life and Death" over a period of about nine years on several locations in the surrounding of river Mara (Kenya and Tanzania).

Brand Fero was cinematographer, Vladimir Petrovski - Karter was the video editor and audio designer, and the music was made by Venko Serafimovski. I tried to influence the written texts and the directing.

With the same team I have already realized several films, more precisely three, in the above mentioned region.

I allow myself to say the entire team is in love with wilderness and in the wondrous animal world which is evidently dancing the last tango in the remaining flora and fauna. Still, I have to mention that by some invisible ray God sent us one of the events that could be interpreted as a amessage and a warning to today's man. Lut us ask the question and give answer, why don't we call animals human since they already have similar destinies. But, should the wealth of the soul have a name?

LIFE AND DEATH

“Life and Death” is the story of a friendship between a gnu and a buffalo. Being born close to each other on the territory of the Maasai Mara reserve, Kenya they became friends.

After that, each of them follows its own life path. Time passes and they grow old.

Shortly before the end of its life, driven by the instinct of death the buffalo heads towards the banks of the river Mara hoping to see its friend gnu for the last time. But the gnu died a few hours before the buffalo arrives, and finding its friend dead, the buffalo died the same day beside it.



SYNOPSIS

When rain fell and the soil by the river turned to mud and small water pools, the gnu herds were already headed for Mara, leaving the trail of their hoofs, which the sun burned into the dried up land.

This was the novel of life which has been repeating in the Serengeti for millions of years. Each year they would cross the river and return back again. Under the tropical sun the rich landscape full of life extended and shrank as a luxury net spread out in the huge expanse hiding the secret of how it all happens.


And so does our story begin. Before the great migration began, near Kilimanjaro a little gnu and a little buffalo were born. The proximity in which they lived made them friends, without them even knowing it, while they ran each with its own herd.

Their friendship simply remained a secret to the end of their lives. There was joy, their youth was easy and they were part of the happiness of the savannah.

But the happiness of the two small creatures did not last long.


First, the mother of the little buffalo was torn apart by a pack of lions, after which exactly the same thing happened to the gnu’s mother. Thus each of them set out on its life’s journey. That is the eternal rule of the savannah. That same savannah often is the birth mother and the death mother as well.

When the rain season came the river poured out of itself with increased anger and then, when the sun scorched the scenery it squeezed itself, shrunken and powerless to the bottom of its riverbed.

Then the grass and the small trees surrounding Mara, together with the animals anxiously looked for salvation without knowing where to find it.

The gnu has long lost his herd and all that was left between him and the river was the savannah.

Previously, the great gnu herds were already on the other side of the river.

In the distance the wobbly line of the river outlined on the horizon.

He ran and ran along the marathon of life and under his hoofs the rogue grass watched the dark colossus as a condensed black cloud flying over it as a rounded bird.

Ah, those flowers and shadows, shadows of memories, shadows of hope that their friendship was hiding in the swaying twigs, in the vast meadows full of grass.

Everybody was carrying the fate of his life in himself. But they somehow knew that towards the end of their lives they would meet again.

To try and find in their hearts the word farewell.

To remind one another that they grew up together, next to each other when they were young.

The instinct was leading them both towards the river now. The gnu with the goal of crossing it over and the buffalo to say goodbye to him for the last time.

On the road to the river near its bank, in a small green pond he met a jolly, curious duckling.


Their two good souls befriended almost instantly, as if they knew each other forever.

He moved slowly along the edge of the pond and the duckling skillfully hopped first left then right.

Nobody knew how that happened in the first place.

And why was it necessary to be known? He no longer felt his old age.

In the mist of that near-death act the form of friendship quietly floated around. Suddenly it seemed to him that the dead body of his friend turned into music that was coming towards him.

The music of remembrance. And maybe it was the eternal silence that had already began to cover them both.

After that shadows appeared, horrendously trembling on the ground, followed by a small red flower over the skull of his friend and trees trunks whose swaying enriched the tropical wind, closing with the tree of their friendship which ended upwards with its crown towards the sky...

And the hippos were under water one moment and the very next they presented themselves as small movable islands.

After several years the feeling of death brought them back together once more. It happened here, on the banks of Mara, among the crocodiles, the hippos, the gushing water and few tree-trunks thrust into it, ominously staring around.

His instinct led him towards the river, towards his childhood friend. There he had the biggest chance to meet him again. Even for the last time. His aged legs barely carried his huge torso and his horns which were the most beautiful in the whole savannah.

But the death monster has long been crawled up into his body as a deadly metal insect.


Next, it seemed to him that the sand was a ghost come here to take him elsewhere, but did not know where he would be carried off, towards the sky or under the river bottom. But was the river water magic that strongly attracted him, or it was a false hope that the same river water will take him to the other side where he will be safer?

The gnus that had crossed the river earlier were already far away.

But the water enticed him.

The river which was grown into the savannah’s soul was the last hope that he will be able to reach the gnu herds once again.

He was not even thinking about the gushing river and he simply voluntary gave himself to destiny.

Nevertheless, the gushing water, the steep stone blocks and his broken leg had kept him prisoner forever. It was only a matter of time when the fatal hour will come upon him.

The curtain of life readily waited to come down.

All of a sudden the scenery thickened. There was the kingdom of the lions and the other predators and only stronger animals went into the low trees or shrubs. The wind here swayed the branches mixed together with shadows and one would get an impression that their rustle together with the wind was a sinister sign of something bad about to happen. But still the strongest of the savannah colossi carelessly went in there. Maybe those were the houses of the savannah, only without any windows or doors, and those that got inside them could disappear in a second. It was as if here there were no interchanging seasons of rain and sun, instead there was only the perennial wind season. Sometimes it was mild and gentle and sometimes cruelly hidden among the branches which trembled from its breath.

But the shrieks of the eagles were letting him
know that now he was the main drama for everybody around. The crocodiles, as if deeply asleep,
secretly waited for their live feast. For some of
the eagles the corpses of the dead gnus were more
than enough but some of them were tempted by
his movement. On the small island he felt as if in
an opened prison, squeezed by the hope to survive
on one side and death on the other.

On the sand were the vultures and on the shore
were the crocodiles, both of them watching their
prey. His feeble body and broken leg were nearing
their end. He was surrounded only by vertigos and
despair. Everyone around him was preparing
to give him the fatal blow. As time passed his hope
was disappearing bit by bit.

So he decided to do the inevitable.

He started the small river slit towards the shore.

The water there was troubled with mud on the bottom and from both sides of the slit there were short stone monoliths. When he stopped short at the first part of the small slit, he noticed right away that the river continued to carry the bodies of the dead gnus.

Nevermind, he carried on fighting until death.

Still death won. It won but it lost the win to be present at the last moment of a friendship.

The buffalo was already there but it was too late.

Their soul was forever filled with blackness.

And without even being aware of it he suddenly felt the hot blood running down his nostrils. And he just stood and stood there. So mute as if he had marble running through his veins.

He had blizzards and horrible winds of remembrance blowing through his heart filled with pain.

Ah, where was his youth now, where was the swaying grass of the savannah? Did everything have to happen this way? During that final moment he suddenly thought there was music coming out of the gnu’s body and it was moving towards him, music written by the hand of their friendship. And so he too found his relief before death. He climbed a little bit higher on the bank, looked for the last time towards his friend and became part of eternity. Forever. But, old age has started to pull him backwards long time ago.

As he was moving towards the shore he stopped in front of a pond ingrown with green grass and there he befriended a small bird.

The dialogue began instantly. The small gentle creature with its delicate wings hopped joyfully left and right next to the strong giant.

And his soul was filled with warmth and pure goodness towards it.

After that the buffalo continued along his way.

He could see the river bank showing itself on the landscape. Passing through the fog of destiny, without knowing how it all happened in the first place, he found himself in front the dead body of his childhood friend. The gnu was lying in the small river slit, on the stone monolith. And they both wanted to meet before they died, they wanted it so much. Over them vertically was the tropical sun and under the buffalo was the elongated shadow of his neck directed towards his dead friend.

Swimming powerlessly along the gushing river the fate of the gnu was writing its history. There were crocodiles on both sides of the river so the exhausted gnu went towards the water where the unmovable hippos were.

They were now protecting him from the crocodiles instead of attacking him in defense of their territory. They must have felt that he was completely powerless and weak.

He stayed there for quite a while until he was chased away from the exile asylum by a young hippo. And he had nowhere left to go.

All he had left in front of him was the small island. Now was the time when he must face the death monster.

On the left and on the right were the dead bodies of the gnus and around them were the vultures which were all over their prey. Some of the eagles would unpredictably fly over his head, hinting his immediate death. And nothing was clear to him.

Should he go forward or backward on the island.

And the island itself was so small. In a moment he would turn left and right searching for a salvation and a brief moment later he would again become aware of the destiny that awaits him.

In that part of the river, Mara had its secret.

Sometimes the sand from the island would drop under the water, sometimes it would emerge in small piles of earth and sometimes it would turn into an elongated surface of sand. It had nothing on it, not even a single grass grew on it. Only grey sand controlled by the mighty hippos which were often accompanied by two small ducks.

But now something unpredictable happened.

Hundreds of dead gnu bodies were floating in the river, and some of them would end up washed out on the small island. And so the drama of this unique landscape was enriched. The sharp eyes of the vultures could recognize the rich prey of their future feast from afar. They lowered one after the other, jumped here and there or moved as if they were living ghosts among the dead bodies.

When it rained and the ground around the river turned into mud and small ponds, the great gnu herds were already on their way to Mara, leaving their hoof prints in the moist mud. And after that the sun often sealed them into small holes in the dried earth.

That view in the wonderful Serengeti has been repeating itself for millions of years.

They would pass it and then return again, here, under the tropical sun and the vast grasslands full of life. All this secret shrank and expanded as a glorious net stretched between light and darkness, hiding inside itself how everything happens.

That is how our story begins.

We are at the beginning of the great migration and all this happens near Kilimanjaro. Here a small gnu and a buffalo were born. The fact that their herds were so close to each other made them friends without even knowing they were. Running side by side made the wind of friendship enter their hearts and stay there forever.

The joy was there and naivety made its thing.

They were running around carelessly, protected by their herds.

Tired and thirsty he was moving through the valley filled with skeletons of different animals and their heartbreaking face expressions were a mute witness of their last spasm before death took over.

He was so tired that he wasn’t aware whether his body or his spirit was the one that walked the road to the river.

Anyway, in the end he managed to notice that he was now walking along the river bank. Just a short moment ago, in front of a small shrub, with worry in his eyes he looked at his wounded leg for the last time. From time to time he would stop and look at it carefully as if something could be done.

Realizing nothing could be done he would continue, helplessly limping away. And the mighty river was here. He was afraid that that same river was going to take him down to its water insides with all its power. And he knew that he had no power left for anything at all. The only thing he knew was that he must try to get across the river. Even if it was for the last time. He felt the dry wind in his nostrils telling him that there was drought coming.

And the gnu herds from both banks of the river were long gone.

There were no gnus or other animals around that were preparing to cross the river. So he would have to be he only victim if it came to that.

But hope overcame fear and he just went into the water, exhausted and with an injured leg. Under him was the water which was pulling him in the deep and above him were the wet rocks, and their slippery, insecure surface. On both sides of the river there were crocodiles and near the small island the hippos were lying around, completely still. Suddenly something unpredictable happened.

Instead of attacking him in defense of their territory, the hippos actually shielded him from the crocodiles. He just stood like that for hours and hours without even moving a bit, and it seemed as if time stood still. He stood hopelessly like that in the shallow water and his legs were almost glued from the mud. From time to time he would look left and than right after which he would look hopelessly into the water. Inside the riverbed the water was pierced by the underwater rocks and trees, and the dead bodies of the gnus that didn’t make it to the other side were piled up as morbid forms of painful outcries.

The river in front of him was a bridge and an abyss at the same time. To cross it or to fall down in it. Along its left and right bank deeply carved in itself, here and there were few bigger rocks or parts of some rocks thrown around without any order, as well as fallen tropical trees trunks at which there could be seen a dead corpse of a stuck gnu or even several of them piled up one over another as if they had an agreement to travel away together. And that was the way in which that furious landscape, talking about the pain before the death spasm of the animals, captured the drama of the despair which happened here before.

And the river ruthlessly continued to carry away what has happened in it just moments before.
