TWO TIMES

“Two Times” is the second film from my trilogy dedicated to the African savannah. The main line in the script moves between the sun and the rain or rather between life and death.
Life is born with the sun and rain, and dies without them.

Therefore, man in the final moments of his life looks at the sky, because it is there that the sun and rain are born, but that same sky can be their grave as well. I must mention that each year two to three million gnus cross the river Mara between Kenya and Tanzania.

For thousands of years the most fascinating spectacle in nature happens in this place.

It all looks like a unique theatre spectacle in which predators stalk their prey, but thanks to new pastures and hope many animal herds widen their own horizons. Here, everything is united, it is the end or the continuation, or it is randomness which determines the fortune or misfortune.

SYNOPSIS

Maybe the tree branches hold the history of the heaven and earth, or the secrets of the ancient man who lived there. And how strange are their trunks.

One minute wriggled, the other twisted or broken in two by thunder and lightning. Trees that grow, wither, fall under ground without having the history of their life cut. And here time runs so quick as if it was smaller than a drop.

Are there grasses made of elephant and gnu herds, mountains made of underground rivers, and sky made of earth? There are no rules here.

Everything is all, and all is in everything. The soul of the savannah travels day and night as an unknown traveller full of secrets. And while it moves, it lives like an amoeba, it self-fertilizes together with its marvellous world. As if God bor- rowed His body to her so that everyone is inside.

Soon strong rain might pour, or a sand dust might rise behind some unwanted vehicle, as a foreboding of something about to happen. But in a short while everything will quiet down. It will quiet down in its calmness. And the nights can stop, they can grow dark.

And all that was in that darkness, seems that it is no more in the morning. The image of the yesterday is pale and life enters the game once again.

In that continent of life two worlds live side by side, the world of the sun and the world of the rain.

Actually nothing dies here, everything continues into the next generation. Still, the heat doesn’t want to know anything about it and in a moment all can expire, can extinguish in the leaden sheath of drought. Then time begins to eat itself, it dies.

But as soon as rain fall, it is as if nothing happened.

Road to rain, road to grass, road to life.

Extinct roads which are born again.

Afterlife at the crossroads of death and a new birth of the roads of life. It is a magic stick with two ends; everything is born with the sun and rain and everything dies without them.

Circle of life. Road of love. Everydayness that won’t be repeated. Here every day is a new life.

Every day is lived forever.

In the morning when the savanna wakes up, the dance of the day begins. Everything moves, hops, or stops for a while wonderingly and continues again. Does anyone know how to describe the misenscène records of that fascination? And a yellow covering of flowers will remind us that it is spring now and life grows together with the grass. But it grows in the hell of future heats.

They know how to conquer all. To transform the savannah in an unclear mass which like an extended fungus tiredly sticks to its shadow.

And when the clouds descend low and narrow down the space between the sky and the earth, and there is an eagle flying nearby, be aware that something will happen.

And who can tell what happens in the souls of the hyenas? They run and run. They pass each other, go and return again. Everywhere around them are roads. As if they were born on them. Roads of roads, crossroads of life which roll as a ball for which no one knows where it started from and where it will stop.

From time to time some subdued laugh of a hyena can be heard, looking distrustfully left and right and continuing again. It will continue along its imagined paths, or it will join other hyenas in case they run along the same path.

But aren’t the paths spirits of the sun, rain and time moving under their feet, or is the uncertainty of life reflected in their worried eyes only? Still, sometimes they are startled by the sound of wheels from some vehicle, to warn them that everything comes from the sky and ends underground, just as the first acquaintance and the last goodbye. At noon when the sun is vertically high and the engine of animal buzz turns off, a weary silence begins in which only dry trees can breathe safely. But in the evening it is as if nothing ever happened. The everyday birth of life will begin again. In this countdown scale maybe some miraculous potion will bring the man back to the savannah, to the prehistory of his soul, in order to share his common home with everyone; without cities, streets, concrete, erasing roads, crossroads, frontiers...

Only then will the savannah return its skin on its own wounded body.

And through all that the wilderness full of love and uncertainty will be born again. When the heart of nights again fills with moving shadows of the trees, this world won’t sleep and will wait with an open soul for the sun to be born.
